docs/source/user-guide/transformations/joins.md, before:

# Joins

Polars supports both equality and non-equality joins. Equality joins are the most common type of join and are used to
combine two `DataFrames` based on a common column or columns. Non-equality joins are used to combine two `DataFrames` based on a
condition that is not an equality condition such as a nearest key match.
## Equality joins
### Join strategies overview

Polars supports the following equality join strategies by specifying the `how` argument to `join`:

| Strategy | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                |
| -------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `inner`  | Returns row with matching keys in _both_ frames. Non-matching rows in either the left or right frame are discarded.                                                                                        |
| `left`   | Returns all rows in the left dataframe, whether or not a match in the right-frame is found. Non-matching rows have their right columns null-filled.                                                        |
| `right`  | Returns all rows in the right dataframe, whether or not a match in the left-frame is found. Non-matching rows have their left columns null-filled.                                                         |
| `full`   | Returns all rows from both the left and right dataframe. If no match is found in one frame, columns from the other frame are null-filled.                                                                  |
| `cross`  | Returns the Cartesian product of all rows from the left frame with all rows from the right frame. Duplicates rows are retained; the table length of `A` cross-joined with `B` is always `len(A) × len(B)`. |
| `semi`   | Returns all rows from the left frame in which the join key is also present in the right frame.                                                                                                             |
| `anti`   | Returns all rows from the left frame in which the join key is _not_ present in the right frame.                                                                                                            |

A separate `coalesce` parameter determines whether to merge key columns with the same name from the left and right
frames.

### Inner join

An `inner` join produces a `DataFrame` that contains only the rows where the join key exists in both `DataFrames`. Let's
take for example the following two `DataFrames`:

{{code_block('user-guide/transformations/joins','innerdf',['DataFrame'])}}

```python exec="on" result="text" session="user-guide/transformations/joins"
--8<-- "python/user-guide/transformations/joins.py:setup"
--8<-- "python/user-guide/transformations/joins.py:innerdf"
```

<p></p>

{{code_block('user-guide/transformations/joins','innerdf2',['DataFrame'])}}

```python exec="on" result="text" session="user-guide/transformations/joins"
--8<-- "python/user-guide/transformations/joins.py:innerdf2"
```

To get a `DataFrame` with the orders and their associated customer we can do an `inner` join on the `customer_id`
column:

{{code_block('user-guide/transformations/joins','inner',['join'])}}

```python exec="on" result="text" session="user-guide/transformations/joins"
--8<-- "python/user-guide/transformations/joins.py:inner"
```

### Left join

The `left` outer join produces a `DataFrame` that contains all the rows from the left `DataFrame` and only the rows from
the right `DataFrame` where the join key exists in the left `DataFrame`. If we now take the example from above and want
to have a `DataFrame` with all the customers and their associated orders (regardless of whether they have placed an
order or not) we can do a `left` join:

{{code_block('user-guide/transformations/joins','left',['join'])}}

```python exec="on" result="text" session="user-guide/transformations/joins"
--8<-- "python/user-guide/transformations/joins.py:left"
```

Notice, that the fields for the customer with the `customer_id` of `3` are null, as there are no orders for this
customer.

### Right join

The `right` outer join produces a `DataFrame` that contains all the rows from the right `DataFrame` and only the rows from
the left `DataFrame` where the join key exists in the right `DataFrame`. If we now take the example from above and want
to have a `DataFrame` with all the customers and their associated orders (regardless of whether they have placed an
order or not) we can do a `right` join:

{{code_block('user-guide/transformations/joins','right',['join'])}}

```python exec="on" result="text" session="user-guide/transformations/joins"
--8<-- "python/user-guide/transformations/joins.py:right"
```

Notice, that the fields for the customer with the `customer_id` of `3` are null, as there are no orders for this
customer.

### Outer join

The `full` outer join produces a `DataFrame` that contains all the rows from both `DataFrames`. Columns are null, if the
join key does not exist in the source `DataFrame`. Doing a `full` outer join on the two `DataFrames` from above produces
a similar `DataFrame` to the `left` join:

{{code_block('user-guide/transformations/joins','full',['join'])}}

```python exec="on" result="text" session="user-guide/transformations/joins"
--8<-- "python/user-guide/transformations/joins.py:full"
```

{{code_block('user-guide/transformations/joins','full_coalesce',['join'])}}

```python exec="on" result="text" session="user-guide/transformations/joins"
--8<-- "python/user-guide/transformations/joins.py:full_coalesce"
```

### Cross join

A `cross` join is a Cartesian product of the two `DataFrames`. This means that every row in the left `DataFrame` is
joined with every row in the right `DataFrame`. The `cross` join is useful for creating a `DataFrame` with all possible
combinations of the columns in two `DataFrames`. Let's take for example the following two `DataFrames`.

{{code_block('user-guide/transformations/joins','df3',['DataFrame'])}}

```python exec="on" result="text" session="user-guide/transformations/joins"
--8<-- "python/user-guide/transformations/joins.py:df3"
```

<p></p>

{{code_block('user-guide/transformations/joins','df4',['DataFrame'])}}

```python exec="on" result="text" session="user-guide/transformations/joins"
--8<-- "python/user-guide/transformations/joins.py:df4"
```

We can now create a `DataFrame` containing all possible combinations of the colors and sizes with a `cross` join:

{{code_block('user-guide/transformations/joins','cross',['join'])}}

```python exec="on" result="text" session="user-guide/transformations/joins"
--8<-- "python/user-guide/transformations/joins.py:cross"
```

<br>


### Semi join

The `semi` join returns all rows from the left frame in which the join key is also present in the right frame. Consider
the following scenario: a car rental company has a `DataFrame` showing the cars that it owns with each car having a
unique `id`.

{{code_block('user-guide/transformations/joins','df5',['DataFrame'])}}

```python exec="on" result="text" session="user-guide/transformations/joins"
--8<-- "python/user-guide/transformations/joins.py:df5"
```

The company has another `DataFrame` showing each repair job carried out on a vehicle.

{{code_block('user-guide/transformations/joins','df6',['DataFrame'])}}

```python exec="on" result="text" session="user-guide/transformations/joins"
--8<-- "python/user-guide/transformations/joins.py:df6"
```

You want to answer this question: which of the cars have had repairs carried out?

An inner join does not answer this question directly as it produces a `DataFrame` with multiple rows for each car that
has had multiple repair jobs:

{{code_block('user-guide/transformations/joins','inner2',['join'])}}

```python exec="on" result="text" session="user-guide/transformations/joins"
--8<-- "python/user-guide/transformations/joins.py:inner2"
```

However, a semi join produces a single row for each car that has had a repair job carried out.

{{code_block('user-guide/transformations/joins','semi',['join'])}}

```python exec="on" result="text" session="user-guide/transformations/joins"
--8<-- "python/user-guide/transformations/joins.py:semi"
```

### Anti join

Continuing this example, an alternative question might be: which of the cars have **not** had a repair job carried out?
An anti join produces a `DataFrame` showing all the cars from `df_cars` where the `id` is not present in
the `df_repairs` `DataFrame`.

{{code_block('user-guide/transformations/joins','anti',['join'])}}

```python exec="on" result="text" session="user-guide/transformations/joins"
--8<-- "python/user-guide/transformations/joins.py:anti"
```

## Inequality joins

### Asof join

An `asof` join is like a left join except that we match on nearest key rather than equal keys.
In Polars we can do an asof join with the `join_asof` method.

Consider the following scenario: a stock market broker has a `DataFrame` called `df_trades` showing transactions it has
made for different stocks.

{{code_block('user-guide/transformations/joins','df7',['DataFrame'])}}

```python exec="on" result="text" session="user-guide/transformations/joins"
--8<-- "python/user-guide/transformations/joins.py:df7"
```

The broker has another `DataFrame` called `df_quotes` showing prices it has quoted for these stocks.

{{code_block('user-guide/transformations/joins','df8',['DataFrame'])}}

```python exec="on" result="text" session="user-guide/transformations/joins"
--8<-- "python/user-guide/transformations/joins.py:df8"
```

You want to produce a `DataFrame` showing for each trade the most recent quote provided _before_ the trade. You do this
with `join_asof` (using the default `strategy = "backward"`).
To avoid joining between trades on one stock with a quote on another you must specify an exact preliminary join on the
stock column with `by="stock"`.

{{code_block('user-guide/transformations/joins','asof',['join_asof'])}}

```python exec="on" result="text" session="user-guide/transformations/joins"
--8<-- "python/user-guide/transformations/joins.py:asofpre"
--8<-- "python/user-guide/transformations/joins.py:asof"
```

If you want to make sure that only quotes within a certain time range are joined to the trades you can specify
the `tolerance` argument. In this case we want to make sure that the last preceding quote is within 1 minute of the
trade so we set `tolerance = "1m"`.

=== ":fontawesome-brands-python: Python"

```python
--8<-- "python/user-guide/transformations/joins.py:asof2"
```

```python exec="on" result="text" session="user-guide/transformations/joins"
--8<-- "python/user-guide/transformations/joins.py:asof2"
```
### Inequality join
We can use `join_where` to perform an inequality join where we join rows based on a condition. For this example we 
take an example of a car rental company finding cars that fit within the budgets of its customers. 

The car rental company has one `DataFrame` showing their cars along with the daily
rate they charge for each car. 
{{code_block('user-guide/transformations/joins','join_where_df1',['DataFrame'])}}

```python exec="on" result="text" session="user-guide/transformations/joins"
--8<-- "python/user-guide/transformations/joins.py:join_where_df1"
```

The car rental company has another `DataFrame` showing their customers and the maximum daily rate they are
willing to pay for a car.

{{code_block('user-guide/transformations/joins','join_where_df2',['DataFrame'])}}

```python exec="on" result="text" session="user-guide/transformations/joins"
--8<-- "python/user-guide/transformations/joins.py:join_where_df2"
```
We can now create a `DataFrame` containing all cars that fit within the budget of each customer with a `join_where` join:

{{code_block('user-guide/transformations/joins','join_where1',['join_where'])}}

```python exec="on" result="text" session="user-guide/transformations/joins"

Commit message:

Add inequality joins to user guide

docs/source/user-guide/transformations/joins.md, after:

# Joins

Polars supports both equality and non-equality joins. Equality joins are the most common type of join and are used to
combine two `DataFrames` based on equal values in one or more columns. Non-equality joins are used to combine two `DataFrames` based on a
condition that is not an equality condition such as a nearest key match.

## Equality joins

### Join strategies overview

Polars supports the following equality join strategies by specifying the `how` argument to `join`:

| Strategy | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                |
| -------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `inner`  | Returns row with matching keys in _both_ frames. Non-matching rows in either the left or right frame are discarded.                                                                                        |
| `left`   | Returns all rows in the left dataframe, whether or not a match in the right-frame is found. Non-matching rows have their right columns null-filled.                                                        |
| `right`  | Returns all rows in the right dataframe, whether or not a match in the left-frame is found. Non-matching rows have their left columns null-filled.                                                         |
| `full`   | Returns all rows from both the left and right dataframe. If no match is found in one frame, columns from the other frame are null-filled.                                                                  |
| `cross`  | Returns the Cartesian product of all rows from the left frame with all rows from the right frame. Duplicates rows are retained; the table length of `A` cross-joined with `B` is always `len(A) × len(B)`. |
| `semi`   | Returns all rows from the left frame in which the join key is also present in the right frame.                                                                                                             |
| `anti`   | Returns all rows from the left frame in which the join key is _not_ present in the right frame.                                                                                                            |

A separate `coalesce` parameter determines whether to merge join columns with the same name from the left and right frames.

### Inner join

An `inner` join produces a `DataFrame` that contains only the rows where the join key exists in both `DataFrames`. Let's
take for example the following two `DataFrames`:

{{code_block('user-guide/transformations/joins','innerdf',['DataFrame'])}}

```python exec="on" result="text" session="user-guide/transformations/joins"
--8<-- "python/user-guide/transformations/joins.py:setup"
--8<-- "python/user-guide/transformations/joins.py:innerdf"
```

<p></p>

{{code_block('user-guide/transformations/joins','innerdf2',['DataFrame'])}}

```python exec="on" result="text" session="user-guide/transformations/joins"
--8<-- "python/user-guide/transformations/joins.py:innerdf2"
```

To get a `DataFrame` with the orders and their associated customer we can do an `inner` join on the `customer_id`
column:

{{code_block('user-guide/transformations/joins','inner',['join'])}}

```python exec="on" result="text" session="user-guide/transformations/joins"
--8<-- "python/user-guide/transformations/joins.py:inner"
```

### Left join

The `left` outer join produces a `DataFrame` that contains all the rows from the left `DataFrame` and only the rows from
the right `DataFrame` where the join key exists in the left `DataFrame`. If we now take the example from above and want
to have a `DataFrame` with all the customers and their associated orders (regardless of whether they have placed an
order or not) we can do a `left` join:

{{code_block('user-guide/transformations/joins','left',['join'])}}

```python exec="on" result="text" session="user-guide/transformations/joins"
--8<-- "python/user-guide/transformations/joins.py:left"
```

Notice, that the fields for the customer with the `customer_id` of `3` are null, as there are no orders for this
customer.

### Right join

The `right` outer join produces a `DataFrame` that contains all the rows from the right `DataFrame` and only the rows from
the left `DataFrame` where the join key exists in the right `DataFrame`. If we now take the example from above and want
to have a `DataFrame` with all the customers and their associated orders (regardless of whether they have placed an
order or not) we can do a `right` join:

{{code_block('user-guide/transformations/joins','right',['join'])}}

```python exec="on" result="text" session="user-guide/transformations/joins"
--8<-- "python/user-guide/transformations/joins.py:right"
```

Notice, that the fields for the customer with the `customer_id` of `3` are null, as there are no orders for this
customer.

### Outer join

The `full` outer join produces a `DataFrame` that contains all the rows from both `DataFrames`. Columns are null, if the
join key does not exist in the source `DataFrame`. Doing a `full` outer join on the two `DataFrames` from above produces
a similar `DataFrame` to the `left` join:

{{code_block('user-guide/transformations/joins','full',['join'])}}

```python exec="on" result="text" session="user-guide/transformations/joins"
--8<-- "python/user-guide/transformations/joins.py:full"
```

{{code_block('user-guide/transformations/joins','full_coalesce',['join'])}}

```python exec="on" result="text" session="user-guide/transformations/joins"
--8<-- "python/user-guide/transformations/joins.py:full_coalesce"
```

### Cross join

A `cross` join is a Cartesian product of the two `DataFrames`. This means that every row in the left `DataFrame` is
joined with every row in the right `DataFrame`. The `cross` join is useful for creating a `DataFrame` with all possible
combinations of the columns in two `DataFrames`. Let's take for example the following two `DataFrames`.

{{code_block('user-guide/transformations/joins','df3',['DataFrame'])}}

```python exec="on" result="text" session="user-guide/transformations/joins"
--8<-- "python/user-guide/transformations/joins.py:df3"
```

<p></p>

{{code_block('user-guide/transformations/joins','df4',['DataFrame'])}}

```python exec="on" result="text" session="user-guide/transformations/joins"
--8<-- "python/user-guide/transformations/joins.py:df4"
```

We can now create a `DataFrame` containing all possible combinations of the colors and sizes with a `cross` join:

{{code_block('user-guide/transformations/joins','cross',['join'])}}

```python exec="on" result="text" session="user-guide/transformations/joins"
--8<-- "python/user-guide/transformations/joins.py:cross"
```

<br>

### Semi join

The `semi` join returns all rows from the left frame in which the join key is also present in the right frame. Consider
the following scenario: a car rental company has a `DataFrame` showing the cars that it owns with each car having a
unique `id`.

{{code_block('user-guide/transformations/joins','df5',['DataFrame'])}}

```python exec="on" result="text" session="user-guide/transformations/joins"
--8<-- "python/user-guide/transformations/joins.py:df5"
```

The company has another `DataFrame` showing each repair job carried out on a vehicle.

{{code_block('user-guide/transformations/joins','df6',['DataFrame'])}}

```python exec="on" result="text" session="user-guide/transformations/joins"
--8<-- "python/user-guide/transformations/joins.py:df6"
```

You want to answer this question: which of the cars have had repairs carried out?

An inner join does not answer this question directly as it produces a `DataFrame` with multiple rows for each car that
has had multiple repair jobs:

{{code_block('user-guide/transformations/joins','inner2',['join'])}}

```python exec="on" result="text" session="user-guide/transformations/joins"
--8<-- "python/user-guide/transformations/joins.py:inner2"
```

However, a semi join produces a single row for each car that has had a repair job carried out.

{{code_block('user-guide/transformations/joins','semi',['join'])}}

```python exec="on" result="text" session="user-guide/transformations/joins"
--8<-- "python/user-guide/transformations/joins.py:semi"
```

### Anti join

Continuing this example, an alternative question might be: which of the cars have **not** had a repair job carried out?
An anti join produces a `DataFrame` showing all the cars from `df_cars` where the `id` is not present in
the `df_repairs` `DataFrame`.

{{code_block('user-guide/transformations/joins','anti',['join'])}}

```python exec="on" result="text" session="user-guide/transformations/joins"
--8<-- "python/user-guide/transformations/joins.py:anti"
```

## Inequality joins

### Asof join

An `asof` join is like a left join except that we match on nearest key rather than equal keys.
In Polars we can do an asof join with the `join_asof` method.

Consider the following scenario: a stock market broker has a `DataFrame` called `df_trades` showing transactions it has
made for different stocks.

{{code_block('user-guide/transformations/joins','df7',['DataFrame'])}}

```python exec="on" result="text" session="user-guide/transformations/joins"
--8<-- "python/user-guide/transformations/joins.py:df7"
```

The broker has another `DataFrame` called `df_quotes` showing prices it has quoted for these stocks.

{{code_block('user-guide/transformations/joins','df8',['DataFrame'])}}

```python exec="on" result="text" session="user-guide/transformations/joins"
--8<-- "python/user-guide/transformations/joins.py:df8"
```

You want to produce a `DataFrame` showing for each trade the most recent quote provided _before_ the trade. You do this
with `join_asof` (using the default `strategy = "backward"`).
To avoid joining between trades on one stock with a quote on another you must specify an exact preliminary join on the
stock column with `by="stock"`.

{{code_block('user-guide/transformations/joins','asof',['join_asof'])}}

```python exec="on" result="text" session="user-guide/transformations/joins"
--8<-- "python/user-guide/transformations/joins.py:asofpre"
--8<-- "python/user-guide/transformations/joins.py:asof"
```

If you want to make sure that only quotes within a certain time range are joined to the trades you can specify
the `tolerance` argument. In this case we want to make sure that the last preceding quote is within 1 minute of the
trade so we set `tolerance = "1m"`.

=== ":fontawesome-brands-python: Python"

```python
--8<-- "python/user-guide/transformations/joins.py:asof2"
```

```python exec="on" result="text" session="user-guide/transformations/joins"
--8<-- "python/user-guide/transformations/joins.py:asof2"
```

### Inequality join

We can use `join_where` to perform an inequality join where we join rows based on a condition. For this example we
take an example of a car rental company finding cars that fit within the budgets of its customers.

The car rental company has one `DataFrame` showing their cars along with the daily
rate they charge for each car.
{{code_block('user-guide/transformations/joins','join_where_df1',['DataFrame'])}}

```python exec="on" result="text" session="user-guide/transformations/joins"
--8<-- "python/user-guide/transformations/joins.py:join_where_df1"
```

The car rental company has another `DataFrame` showing their customers and the maximum daily rate they are
willing to pay for a car.

{{code_block('user-guide/transformations/joins','join_where_df2',['DataFrame'])}}

```python exec="on" result="text" session="user-guide/transformations/joins"
--8<-- "python/user-guide/transformations/joins.py:join_where_df2"
```

We can now create a `DataFrame` containing all cars that fit within the budget of each customer with a `join_where` join:

{{code_block('user-guide/transformations/joins','join_where1',['join_where'])}}

```python exec="on" result="text" session="user-guide/transformations/joins"
--8<-- "python/user-guide/transformations/joins.py:join_where1"
```
